When last I spoke of matters regarding how this blog gets made, [back in October 2014](http://rick.engineer/How-did-this-get-made-October-2014-edition/), things were a little different than they are today. I was using the Ghost blogging platform on my own hosting, which offered many benefits, but gradually I became less and less enamored. Some of it might be the blog software version of the seven year itch, but my initial motivation to move off of Ghost was nervousness around having my posts stuck in a datastore on a hosted server. What if the server went down or the hosting provider disappeared? Would I be at the mercy of Google's cache? I'm sure there are backup solutions but the last thing I need is a rickety process to babysit or cross my fingers and hope it's working.

The git-based workflow of Jekyll + Github pages seemed much more appealing. It seems to have become the standard way for programmers to write their tech blogs these days so it definitely merited some investigation. Create a Markdown file, fill in some metadata, check in and push to Github and it would magically appear on my blog? The git-based system automatically features revision tracking and any device with a browser allowed me to edit my site via the Github editor.

Another neat thing is that it's easy to link to file in my Github repo for a given post, ready for the user to submit a pull request should they find any glaring problems.

So far I haven't noticed any real drawbacks, except perhaps that there was a slight learning curve when I was converting my Ghost posts over to the Jekyll format. Mostly figuring out allowed characters in metadata and dates. It's been very nice having a wealth of info out there and if I'm ever lucky enough to garner a large audience for any given post I can be confident that Github Pages will handle the load.
